

March 28, 2018  —


(U) Objective:
(U) We determined whether DoD Components implemented the DoD Emergency Management (EM) Program in accordance with Federal and DoD policy for installations within the U.S. Africa Command (USAFRICOM) area of responsibility.
(U) Background:
(U) DoD Instruction 6055.17 defines EM as an ongoing process to prevent, mitigate, prepare for, respond to, maintain continuity during, and recover from an incident that threatens life, property, operations, or the environment. EM focuses on emergencies affecting installation personnel and facilities, and the ability of the installation to act as a force projection platform. According to the Instruction, the DoD should maintain readiness and sustain mission assurance by establishing a comprehensive, all-hazards EM program at DoD installations worldwide. The DoD has U.S. personnel, operations, or equipment at locations within the USAFRICOM area of responsibility.
(U) Findings:
DoD Components did not fully implement the DoD EM Program in the USAFRICOM area of responsibility. Specifically, we determined that USAFRICOM, the Military Departments, and Combined Joint Task Force-Horn of Africa EM officials did not develop EM programs for locations in the USAFRICOM area of responsibility. According to USAFRICOM, Military Departments, and Combined Joint Task Force-Horn of Africa EM officials, only locations in the USAFRICOM area of responsibility had EM programs. In addition, the Department of the Navy and Air Force EM officials did not implement all DoD EM Program requirements outlined in DoD Instruction 6055.17 for the two locations with programs that we visited. For example, the Installation Commander, did not ensure they had the resources and equipment necessary to meet requirements, and the Installation Commander, did not complete a capability risk assessment.
(U) The DoD EM Program was not fully implemented in the USAFRICOM area of responsibility because:
·        (U) the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics(USD[AT&L]) did not provide guidance on how DoD Components should determine the level of DoD EM Program necessary for each installation, including installations with a small footprint like those found in the USAFRICOM area of responsibility; and
·        (U) USAFRICOM did not oversee the DoD EM Program for its area of responsibility.
(U) Without an EM program, DoD installations in the USAFRICOM area of responsibility do not have a formal and coordinated effort to prevent, prepare for, respond to, and recover from an attack or natural emergency, which could ultimately threaten the lives of personnel and property on DoD installations and impede the DoD’s ability to successfully complete mission operations.
(U) Recommendations:
(U) In addition to other recommendations, we recommend that the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (Environment, Safety, and Occupation Health):
·        (U) Update DoD Instruction 6055.17 to require DoD Components to complete risk assessments at all locations worldwide, identify locations that require an EM program and report the results to the responsible combatant command.
·        (U) Issue interim guidance that requires DoD Components to evaluate all locations worldwide to determine the need for an EM program.
·        (U) Develop an assessment process to ensure that DoD Components are effectively and consistently applying and integrating the DoD EM Program.
(U) We also recommend that the Chief, J34 Protection, USAFRICOM, assign an EM program manager to ensure that the DoD EM Program is fully implemented in the USAFRICOM area of responsibility.
(U) We recommend that the Installation Commander develop procedures to ensure all risk assessments are annually reevaluated and updated, response capabilities align with the risk assessments, and the EM plan is accurate and executable.
(U) We also recommended that the Installation Emergency Manager update the EM plan to reflect the installation-specific response capabilities, and establish procedures to ensure EM-related support agreements are annually reviewed and documented.
(U) Management Comments and Our Response:
(U) Assistant Secretary of Defense (Energy, Installations, and Environment), responding for the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (Environment, Safety, and Occupation Health), partially agreed with the recommendation to update DoD Instruction 6055.17 to require DoD Components to complete risk assessments at all locations worldwide to determine whether locations require an EM program and to include instructions for determining which DoD Components are responsible for completing the risk assessments. In addition, the Assistant Secretary partially agreed with the recommendation to issue interim guidance that requires DoD Components to evaluate all locations worldwide to determine the need for an EM program. The Assistant Secretary only partially addressed the recommendations; therefore, the recommendations are unresolved and open. We request that the Assistant Secretary provide specific actions to address the recommendations after working through the EM Steering Group. In addition, we request that the Assistant Secretary provide planned dates of completion of those actions.
(U) The Assistant Secretary of Defense (Energy, Installations, and Environment), responding for the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (Environment, Safety, and Occupation Health), disagreed with the recommendation to develop an assessment process to ensure that DoD Components are effectively and consistently applying and integrating the DoD EM Program. The Assistant Secretary did not address the recommendation; therefore, the recommendation is unresolved and open. We acknowledge the need to avoid redundancy, but according to DoD Instruction 6055.17, the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Energy, Installations, and Environment), has oversight responsibilities. According to DoD Instruction 6055.17, the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Energy, Installations, and Environment), under the authority, direction, and control of the USD(AT&L), will coordinate DoD EM Program requirements with other guidance and instructions and develop and maintain DoD policy to provide consistent and integrated EM. However, without an assessment process and oversight, there is no assurance that DoD Component heads are applying a consistent and integrated approach for implementing and assessing compliance of EM Programs effectively.
(U) Therefore, we request that the Assistant Secretary provide additional comments detailing specific actions to address the recommendation to ensure that DoD Components are effectively and consistently applying and integrating the DoD EM Program.
(U) The Deputy Director of Operations, J3, responding for the Chief, J34 Protection, USAFRICOM, agreed with the recommendation to assign an EM program manager to ensure that the EM Program is fully implemented in the USAFRICOM area of responsibility in accordance with DoD Instruction 6055.17. Comments from the Deputy Director addressed all specifics of the recommendation; therefore, the recommendation is resolved but remains open. We will close the recommendation once we verify Headquarters USAFRICOM has taken actions to meet the requirements of DoD Instruction 6055.17.
(U) The Vice Commander, 435th Air Expeditionary Wing, responding for the Installation Commander, agreed with the recommendations to develop procedures to ensure all risk assessments are annually reevaluated and updated, response capabilities align with the risk assessments, and the EM plan is accurate and executable. The Vice Commander stated that it is an ongoing process to complete these assessments. Comments from the Director addressed all specifics of the recommendations; therefore, the recommendations are resolved but remain open. We will close the recommendations once we verify that the Installation Commander, completed all risk assessments and the annual reevaluation process is completed, the low-threat assessment aligns with updated risk assessments, and the Installation Commander updated and exercised the EM plan.
 
